
                              amadmin
Prev  Chapter 36. The Amanda Manual Pages.  Next

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Name

amadmin  administrative interface to control Amanda backups

Synopsis

amadmin config command [command options] [ -o | configoption ]*

DESCRIPTION

Amadmin performs various administrative tasks on the config Amanda
configuration.
See the amanda(8) man page for more details about Amanda.

COMMANDS

Commands that take a hostname [ disks ] parameter pair operate on all disks in
the disklist for that hostname if no disks are specified. Where hostname is
also marked as being optional, the command operates on all hosts and disks in
the disklist. Both hostname and disks are special expressions, see the "HOST &
DISK EXPRESSION" section of amanda(8) for a description.


  version
      Show the current version and some compile time and runtime parameters.
      The config parameter must be present but is ignored.

  force-bump [ hostname [ disks ]* ]+
      Force the disks on hostname to bump to a new incremental level during the
      next Amanda run.

  force-no-bump [ hostname [ disks ]* ]+
      Force the disks on hostname to not bump to a new incremental level during
      the next Amanda run.

  unforce-bump [ hostname [ disks ]* ]+
      Undo a previous force-bump or force-no-bump command.

  force [ hostname [ disks ]* ]+
      Force the disks on hostname to do a full (level 0) backup during the next
      Amanda run.

  unforce [ hostname [ disks ]* ]+
      Undo a previous force command.

  reuse tapelabel [ ... ]
      The tapes listed will be available for reuse at their point in the tape
      cycle.

  no-reuse tapelabel [ ... ]
      The tapes listed will not be reused when their turn comes up again in the
      tape cycle. Note that if this causes the number of reusable tapes to drop
      below the amanda.conf tapecycle value, Amanda will request new tapes
      until the count is satisfied again.

  due [ hostname [ disks ]* ]*
      Show when the next full dump is due.

  find [ --sort hkdlpb ] [ hostname [ disks ]* ]*
      Display all backups currently on tape or in the holding disk. The tape
      label or holding disk filename, file number, and status are displayed.
      The --sort option changes the sort order using the following flags:
      hhost name kdisk name ddump date lbackup level p dump part btape label
      An uppercase letter reverses the sort order for that key. The default
      sort order is hkdlpb.

  delete [ hostname [ disks ]* ]+
      Delete the specified disks on hostname from the Amanda database.

      Note

      If you do not also remove the disk from the disklist file, Amanda will
      treat it as a new disk during the next run.

  tape
      Display the tape(s) Amanda expects to write to during the next run. See
      also amcheck(8).

  bumpsize
      Display the current bump threshold parameters, calculated for all backup
      levels.

  balance [ --days <num> ]
      Display the distribution of full backups throughout the dump schedule.

  export [ hostname [ disks ]* ]*
      Convert records from the Amanda database to a text format that may be
      transmitted to another Amanda machine and imported.

  import
      Convert exported records read from standard input to a form Amanda uses
      and insert them into the database on this machine.

  disklist [ hostname [ disks ]* ]*
      Display the disklist information for each of the disks on hostname (or
      all hosts). Mostly used for debugging.

  info [ hostname [ disks ]* ]*
      Display the database record for each of the disks on hostname (or all
      hosts). Mostly used for debugging.

  -o configoption
      See the "CONFIGURATION OVERRIDE" section in amanda(8).


EXAMPLES

Request three specific file systems on machine-a get a full level 0 backup
during the next Amanda run.

  $ amadmin daily force machine-a / /var /usr
  amadmin: machine-a:/ is set to a forced level 0 tonight.
  amadmin: machine-a:/var is set to a forced level 0 tonight.
  amadmin: machine-a:/usr is set to a forced level 0 tonight.

Request all file systems on machine-b get a full level 0 backup during the next
Amanda run.

  $ amadmin daily force machine-b
  amadmin: machine-b:/ is set to a forced level 0 tonight.
  amadmin: machine-b:/var is set to a forced level 0 tonight.
  amadmin: machine-b:/usr is set to a forced level 0 tonight.
  amadmin: machine-b:/home is set to a forced level 0 tonight.

Undo the previous force request for /home on machine-b. The other file systems
will still get a full level 0 backup.

  $ amadmin daily unforce machine-b /home
  amadmin: force command for machine-b:/home cleared.

Locate backup images of /var from machine-c. The tape or file column displays
either a tape label or a filename depending on whether the image is on tape or
is still in the holding disk. If the image is on tape, the file column tells
you which file on the tape has the image (file number zero is a tape label).
This column shows zero and is not meaningful if the image is still in the
holding disk. The status column tells you whether the backup was successful or
had some type of error.

  $ amadmin daily find machine-c /var
  date        host      disk lv tape or file                 file part  status
  2000\-11\-09  machine\-c /var  0 000110                       9   --  OK
  2000\-11\-08  machine\-c /var  2 000109                       2   --  OK
  2000\-11\-07  machine\-c /var  2 /amanda/20001107/machine-c._var.2  0 OK
  2000\-11\-06  machine\-c /var  2 000107                       2   --  OK
  2000\-11\-05  machine\-c /var  2 000106                       3   --  OK
  2000\-11\-04  machine\-c /var  2 000105                       2   --  OK
  2000\-11\-03  machine\-c /var  2 000104                       2   --  OK
  2000\-11\-02  machine\-c /var  2 000103                       2   --  OK
  2000\-11\-01  machine\-c /var  1 000102                       5   --  OK
  2000\-10\-31  machine\-c /var  1 000101                       3   --  OK

Forget about the /workspace disk on machine-d. If you do not also remove the
disk from the disklist file, Amanda will treat it as a new disk during the next
run.

  $ amadmin daily delete machine-d /workspace
  amadmin: machine-d:/workspace deleted from database.
  amadmin: NOTE: you'll have to remove these from the disklist yourself.

Find the next tape Amanda will use (in this case, 123456).

  $ amadmin daily tape
  The next Amanda run should go onto tape 123456 or a new tape.

Show how well full backups are balanced across the dump cycle. The due-date
column is the day the backups are due for a full backup. #fs shows the number
of filesystems doing full backups that night, and orig KB and out KB show the
estimated total size of the backups before and after any compression,
respectively.
The balance column shows how far off that night's backups are from the average
size (shown at the bottom of the balance column). Amanda tries to keep the
backups within +/- 5%, but since the amount of data on each filesystem is
always changing, and Amanda will never delay backups just to rebalance the
schedule, it is common for the schedule to fluctuate by larger percentages. In
particular, in the case of a tape or backup failure, a bump will occur the
following night, which will not be smoothed out until the next pass through the
schedule.
The last line also shows an estimate of how many Amanda runs will be made
between full backups for a file system. In the example, a file system will
probably have a full backup done every eight times Amanda is run (e.g. every
eight days).

  $ amadmin daily balance
   due-date  #fs   orig KB    out KB  balance
  -------------------------------------------
  11/10 Mon   21    930389    768753    +5.1%
  11/11 Tue   29   1236272    733211    +0.2%
  11/12 Wed   31   1552381    735796    +0.6%
  11/13 Thu   23   1368447    684552    -6.4%
  11/14 Fri   32   1065603    758155    +3.6%
  11/15 Sat   14   1300535    738430    +0.9%
  11/16 Sun   31   1362696    740365    +1.2%
  11/17 Mon   30   1427936    773397    +5.7%
  11/18 Tue   11   1059191    721786    -1.3%
  11/19 Wed   19   1108737    661867    -9.5%
  -------------------------------------------
  TOTAL      241  12412187   7316312   731631  (estimated 8 runs per dumpcycle)


FILES

/usr/local/etc/amanda/config/amanda.conf

AUTHOR

James da Silva, <jds@amanda.org> : Original text
Stefan G. Weichinger, <sgw@amanda.org>, maintainer of the Amanda-documentation:
XML-conversion

SEE ALSO

amanda(8), amcheck(8), amdump(8), amrestore(8), amfetchdump(8)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Prev                                   Up        Next
Chapter 36. The Amanda Manual Pages.  Home  amaespipe

